This theme emulates the look and feel of the RISC OS 'window manager'.
Actually, RISC OS doesn't have a window manager in the same way X
does, but if you imagine it does, this is an emulation of that ;)

The look is obviously quite different, but coming anywhere close to
the unique look of RISC OS would be quite blatantly obvious, so to
avoid copyright issues, the look of this theme is unique. You may
consider it to be RISC OS grown up ;)

Functions that will be implemented but are currently missing:
  Transparent resize.
  Shading.
  Backward-resize.
  NOTE: Backward-resize is an interesting feature and quite useful.
        If you resize a window such that you hit the screen edge
        in the process, the window resizes 'backwards' (i.e.
        moves in the opposite direction to your drag and at the
        same time continues increasing in size). So instead
        of having to let go of the resize handle, move the window
        and resize again, it just does what you want it to do.

Button functions: (Missing functionality is marked with TODO)

Button One:

  Left button: TODO
               Lower window and drop focus. This is currently unimplemented
               in kwin itself.

Button Two:

  Left button: Close window.

  Right button: TODO, if I can be bothered.
                Close window.
                If window is filer window, open another filer window
                in parent dir.
                If window is document window, open a filer window in
                dir containing document.
                If you hold Shift, the window doesn't close.
                NOTE:
                This requires app support.
                If I were to implement this, I would do it in konqy
                and probably not bother for other apps.

Titlebar:

  Left button: Raise, focus and move window

  Middle button: Move window

  Right button: Menu
                Note: Buttons are this way around for compatibility with
                other kwin themes.

Button Three:

  Left button: Iconify window.

Button Four:

  Left button: Maximise or restore window plus raise and focus.

  Middle button: Maximise vertically or restore window plus raise and focus.

  Right button: Maximise or restore window.

Resize bar left/right:

  Left button: Move that corner (resizes window) and raise

  Other buttons: Same without raising

Resize bar centre:

  Left button: Move that edge (resizes window) and raise

  Other buttons: Same without raising

The lower bar is used for resizing. It works in the NeXT style.
This doesn't exist on RISC OS. In RISC OS, there is a 'resize handle'
in the lower right corner of the window (actually inside the window).

To emulate this would mean covering part of the window with the decorations,
which is not acceptable. RISC OS gets away with it by making sure that
there is a vertical scrollbar visible at all times, which is just stupid.
It's also an impossibility with X11, as the window manager does not know
anything about scrollbars - they belong to the application, so don't ask
me to implement it.

